Speaker 1: [[background noise]] Please keep your conversations going don't let me interrupt my name is James [[??]] I work at The Center For Folklife and Cultural Heritage, where I serve as director of cultural heritage policy. In a minute I am going to be joined by Mrs [[??]] who is going to correct me in, she said that was great. I was about to say she was going to correct me in the massacring of her name. She is one of my colleagues here at the Smithsonian Institution at the National Museum of African Art which is just across the way. And by Mr. [[??]] Wong. Would you please welcome Mr. Wong. [[clapping]] Yes please.
And we are going to be talking about diasporas. I was just thinking that when I began um working at the Smithsonian Institution almost 40 years ago as a 26 year old graduate student at Howard University I was invited down to a meeting about the African diaspora. And here I was this young man, this African American I put that in quotations, invited to the very prestigious Smithsonian Institution. The mandate of mandate of which is the increase in the diffusion of knowledge in all of these scholars and they said "we want you to work with us on the African Diaspora program so I sat up and tried to look very intelligent. I knew that the word diaspora meant dispersion but I did not know how to connect it in any real way, because at that time people talked about the Jewish diaspora but it was not yet a term where everybody was talking about the spread of their cultures around the world and the very deep formal intimate way in which Jewish communities who had been dispersed around the world.
Now we have diaspora studies and diaspora scholars and diaspora department and if you put the word diaspora in your google it just pops up everywhere. Well we are going to talk about diaspora and identity. Miss [[??]] works again as community outreach coordinator at the National Museum of African Art and she is originally from Kenya but I want to put that in quotation because we are going to find out is she from Kenya, is she still there, is she here, how does that spread out? Is that a place over there and she's here? Are we living a new kind of sense of identity and reality?
And Mr. Raymond Wong who started his group Wong people in 1985 in Chinatown D.C. uh which is one of the hallmarks of inner city culture here in Washington D.C., less than a mile, a nice little walk right up 13th, uh 7th av, uh 7th street here. He is originally from [[??]] Hong Kong I hope I pronounced that appropriate. He came to the United States at one years of age with his mother and his group performs dragon and lion dances at special events and gives free classes in Kung fu and Tai chi to everyone from the homeless to kids to adults to senior citizens.
Mr. Wong believes that martial arts teach individuals how the body works, personal strengths and limits, self defense skills and how to use and understand your surroundings. Welcome. Lets start with Miss [[??]] to tell us who you are. Where you were born, what's your relationship is to where you where born and where you are.
Speaker 2: Alright. Good afternoon everyone. Thank you so much for having me here. It is great to be here this afternoon. So I am born and raised in Nairobi, Kenya. I came here as an adult to attend a university and I ended up living in Pennsylvania, which is where I went to school and um ended up, I'm trying to , ended up eventually staying and living and working in the U.S. and the question was which, where I place my identity and it's very interesting because I am Kenyan, by you know, my formative years in Nairobi, going to school, going to High School, primary school, working and living in Nairobi and then leaving as an adult to come out for higher education. And, you do
Gathoni Kamau: You do become part of the new country that you live in and you embrace it and you become apart of that as well.
Um, so, I see myself as African American. I am Kenyan and I am American. In many respects I am, I have both cultures in me.
Um, and so, you know I feel in some ways I'm very very Kenyan and in some ways you don't know if that ever goes away because it was from-
as your formative years so it is a part of just who you are. Um, and then you know as an adult you embrace your new environment, your new culture, and I am when I go home I am very American.
You know to my family and friends who are at home and so you have a duality but at the end I have myself Gathoni who I am as an individual
and that is the same regardless of you know, which culture I'm living in and working in. I do live and work here in the U.S and so this is my home.
Um, and I also think of Nairobi as home. So I have two homes.
James Early: As we, speak with Ms. Kamau and Mr. Wong I want you to be thinking about your identities. Um, what is your diaspora? Um, how do you describe yourself?
Um, and I do wanna come back to Ms. Kamau in just a moment on being African American but lets go to Mr. Wong.
Mr. Wong tell us when you came here you came with your mother did you have other family here already?
Raymond Wong: Okay well Uh, my father, he was actually born in Norfolk, Virginia Uh you know but traditional family, Chinese family, his dad sent him back to China to get a wife.
So you see the connection there?
James Early: Back to the dia-
Raymond Wong: Yes
James Early: Back to the diasporas
Raymond Wong: Back to China to get a wife, so he, I guess he got one, he hooked up and uh, a year later I was born,
but, uh, back then China did not have open relations with the U.S and people weren't able to leave, and uh, and move about freely as they can now
and they really didn't have tourists that wasn't allowed back then. Uh, that was the 19- early 1960s uh 19- late 1950s.
So, my mother escaped to Hong Kong as most Chinese and because back then Hong Kong was not under Chinese rules it was under British rule. So I was born in Hong Kong and uh, I guess I'm British.
[[laughter]]
Yeah. Yeah I didn't think about that. Yeah so I was born in Hong Kong. So, about almost a year later, um, because my father was an American citizen
Uh, his grandfather was a well todo Chinese restaurant owner here in Norfolk, Virginia and he was one of the first to open up a Chinese restaurant in Norfolk because
back then there weren't that many Chinese uh, around period. So uh, he got a good lawyer and uh, filed the papers, and got, my mom and us both over to the U.S.
So I got here about one and a half and have been here ever since. And uh, I guess I regard myself as an American citizen because uh educational wise, financial wise, credit card wise, I have U.S,
Yeah, I'm U.S.A. But as far as my Chinese heritage, I try to maintain some of the teachings uh, some of the roots, and some of the practices, that make Chinese people Chinese.
So uh, what makes you who you are is not necessarily what government or what country you represent is the way you live and your lifestyle and the background of your family.
So I try to maintain and live that as an American citizen of course.
James Early: I can't think of a scholar who could have put it in a better theoretical or conceptual way. Culture travels with you no matter what your passport says.
How does that come up in your being Kenyan? What are some of the cultural things that even as you describe yourself as an African American,
are not historically associated with the evolved historical expressions and ways of knowing and doing of African Americans who came here in the first instance as descendants of of enslaved Africans?
Gathoni Kamau: Ok so, I consider myself an African American, a Kenyan American. I'm not historically, you know, African American in the context that you just described
but as sharing, you know, part of the culture just the way I live here in America Um, I, it's the little things like my colleague here was speaking about the food that I eat is very Kenyan
you know, or even though, you know, I've lived here so many years there's some things that you say "I just didn't get it. What was the joke?" You know? You just don't get some things but um,
I think in that context you almost have to know more of the history or the context in which certain sayings or phrases come from.
Um, and so in that regard you know when I'm in Kenya also I'm like "What's that?" It's something new I don't know just because I live here
but um, in terms of being, you know, like your culture is very dominant in us I believe as individuals and so-
Gathoni Kamau: It is part of who I am, in my language, in my speech, in the food that I prepare, in dances, listening to music.
You kind of end up incorporating everything that you have and looking at the diaspora, the dispersion, it's all over the world.
It's almost like we are becoming this one global village, but you have your individual identities, we each have them but the culture that is dominant within us is the one
we just immerse and thrive. You know America is special and unique in that it has every culture represented here so,
I am looking for a looking for a certain spice I will find it somewhere, you know I will find it here and so, you know I am at home, equally at home as I am in Nairobi.
James Early: I think for many African Americans or black Americans of my generation, I'm just shy of 68 years of age,
it's a difficult thing I think and even for most of you, we tend to think about our identity based on what we know about our parents,
we perhaps knew about our grandparents if we were lucky, what we knew about our great grandparents,
and then we tend to place our identity in our actuarial chart of the hopefully 80 or so years that we are going to live.
But, check this out. Since the 1965 immigration act, more Africans have come to this country than were brought during the entire period of slavery.
There were only approximately a half million enslaved Africans who were brought to the United States. We look alike but fifty, a hundred year from now,
two hundred years from now, a short time in history, the culture, the ways of knowing and doing, because culture is alive, it continues to evolve and so this notion of African American has been stretched.
Mr. Wong when did you come to Washington, this predominatingly black city, I think still is about fifty one or so percent black, seventy percent black when I came here about forty years ago?
Raymond Wong: I arrived around 1958-59, well 58 yeah. I'm not sure if I can remember what it looks like back then but it wasn't that black back then it was some,
a lot of Jewish here back then along with the black population. Right after the Martin Luther King riots it became all black.
James Early: You started working, when you started working in the community talk to us about who you were working with and what were some of the cultural issues that you encountered.
Raymond Wong: Well my father, he opened up a Chinese restaurant because back then either you had  Chinese hand laundry or a Chinese restaurant.
So, he managed to get into the restaurant business in the corner of second and Florida avenue northwest and that was black community. So everything was catered to the black community.
It was an American restaurant but it had Chinese food. The place was called Jimmy's, Jimmy's a good American name.
So, he sold not only Chinese food but soul food, yeah southern food and we were there, he was there what, 1958 uh
I think I closed it down, I didn't close it down but I discontinued the food service around 1980, 1995.
Alright, I just moved on to other things. But, we served the black community for three or four decades. Yes
James Early: What kind of influence did it have on the way that you look at life, your taste, your interests, your sense of self identity in this mix of  Chinese and African Americans?
Raymond Wong: Well it just taught me some lessons that
Raymond Wong: All people have the same strengths, all people have the same weaknesses, all people experience all things,
you just have to get to know them. And the way you get to know them is you have to deal with them on a daily basis.
So if me, having to work there, uh, I have to deal with the customers on a daily basis. Uh, I dealt with some really nice people, and I dealt with some really bad people.
I dealt with, uh, educated people, I dealt with drug addicts.
So, I, even had a gun stuck to my face a few times, for hold-ups several times,
and, uh, I made it through that, and, uh, but, uh, you know, you have to get to know the people, whoever they are.
And once we get to know them, then you understand.
James Early: Have you had the experience of new Chinese immigrants coming who became Chinese citizens, Chinese American citizens?
What has been your sense of your identity in relationship to them, are their sense of their identity
in relationship to the kinds of history and experience that you come out of?
Raymond Wong: Well the Chinese who are coming over now, uh, they come over for opportunity. They come over to start a business, and uh, that's good but
when you move into community and you start a business, is not just about selling something
or providing a service? It's also about getting to know the people.
Because if you get to know the people, then your business transactions will be a lot smoother than if you did not know the people,
because, uh, it's that personal element that's missing that keeps business flowing smoothly.
So, the--as far as the newer Chinese, the language barrier, that kind of keeps them from interacting with the customers
so they just keep it at "Okay. You want this? Give me this, uh, it's five dollars." You know?
and they just kind of leave it at that,
and a lot of times that causes friction in the community, because they feel, well
this foreigner is coming over into my neighborhood, and making money off of me, and I can't even get a "Good afternoon" from them,
well they don't know how to say "Good afternoon," but--it's the language barrier and the ability to
interact with people on a level outside of business.
James Early: We're going to come to you shortly, not just with your questions,
but your comments about diaspora, your own experiences, your own backgrounds.
But, I want to ask each of you, starting with Ms. Kamau,
being out here on the National Mall, uh, having Kenya, and having China,
what does that mean for you? How do you feel about that?
Gathoni Kamau: Alright, thank you
It's great. It's really--it's a proud moment. I'm like, oh this is- because, you know, this is the Smithsonian
you have the best of the culture being showcased
um, in every aspect, and uh, people can interact just like Raymond was saying can go out and speak with the artisans, the participants.
It's not just pictures, or you know, something that you see on TV.
But, you can actually interact with the people, and so that makes the experience all the more real
and all the more inviting and a great experience for everybody all around,
so I feel great [[laughs]] to be here, I wish I could, you know, I'm at work, but I would love to come and spend and go to every single,
you know, demonstration and just visit and see what everyone is doing on a much more detailed level,
but it's absolutely beautiful to see this Folklife Festival is absolutely beautiful,
you know, every year it's a different country, different culture, but, you know that's what it's doing, is highlighting it.
So, I feel very proud to see all the artisans, and all the culture portrayed and demonstrated the way it is.
James Early: And Mr. Wong from Hong Kong to Norfolk to Washington and then many diverse Chinese cultures within the national context of China are here on the National Mall.
What's been your experience in interacting or have you had the chance to interact?
Raymond Wong: Well yeah, definitely we need more events like these to bridge that gap with learning about each other and understanding.
So, we learn enough, we can understand people. It's that lack of information that causes problems. Yes.
James Early: Questions, observations, about your identities and diasporas,
where do you come from? Do you--when you say that you're an American or that you're from some place else what is that
really mean in the twenty-first century with all of the movements of people and ways of knowing and doing that are not just bounded by being from Norfolk or being from Washington
but that you can find all over the world? Any questions? Observations? Yes ma'am.
Woman in audience: Did you marry a Chinese or did you marry someone from here?
James Early: Did you marry, are you married?
Raymond Wong: Yes I am.
James Early: First of all, did you marry someone from here, ah, is that, what is that person's identity?
Raymond Wong: Uh, yes I did marry someone from here. I met her at a bar.
[[laughter]]
Yes, I did not marry Chinese, she's Filipina. Right--so yes.
Woman in audience 2: Will your kids carry on owning a restaurant?
James Early: Will your kids carry on owning a restaurant?
Raymond Wong: Uh, only if they wanna do it. You gotta remember, restaurant work is --
Woman in audience 2: It's hard work!--
Raymond Wong: --long hours, and that's why I got out of it, because, I wanna be able to come to events like these, but if I ran a restaurant I wouldn't be able to do it. Yeah!
James Early: OK, so you married a Filipina, you're a Chinese American. How do your kids identify? What is this term Asian-Pacific American? Does that mean- What does that mean for you?
Well it depends on the person, depends on the family upbringing. Uh, it's not so much your race, not so much what you're called, it's so much-
it's more your cultural practices and how you live. It's your- what causes conflict is not what race you are, or what what you are called it's your cultural practices.
Does this group's cultural practice conflict with this group's cultural practices?  That's really about.
It's- can we get along in a working fashion whether you're Irish, or Russian, or whatever. Can we get along? How close are our cultures?
James Early: So in your household foodways, is it, what, is there one that dominates, or?
Raymond Wong: Well, Filipinos eat a lot of rice; so Chinese eat a lot of rice. Filipinos eat a lot of pork, Chinese eat some pork, yeah.
Filipinos overcook their food [[laughter]], Chinese cook it just right, so we have some problems there! So, and Filipinos eat a lot of sweets,
so Chinese do not, so we have some issues there! And, what is more--there's other things too but we're not going to get into that. [[laughter]]
James Early: So one, just one last question to you before we go back to the audience.
So, how old are your children? And are they old enough where they are interacting and people say, who are you? What are you? How do they identify?
Raymond Wong: Well, I mean, they were raised to keep an open mind, to accept people for their actions and not their labels.
Because at the end of the day it's what a person does, what a person can accomplish.
It's not what they call you because they can call you anything you want but if you accomplish nothing then we're zero, you know?
So it's a person's actions determine who they really are and not what they're called.
James Early: Ms. Kamau, do- is there a Kenyan community- not so much a fixed community but associations or civic associations or cultural groupings that you engage with?
Gathoni Kamau: So there are very many cultural, civic, organizations based around church, around business, professionals,
and they are in the greater DMV area, actually they are all over the United States.
And so, I do interact with them, I'm not a member of any one, but there are a lot of social
activities and festivities around birth, or weddings or, you know, just regular cultural things, and a reason to get together and listen to Kenyan music and eat Kenyan food,
this is what draws the communities together and network as well. So they do exist, and they are very active within the groups as well.
Um, I do also- I'm a member of African Immigrant Refugee Foundation and so that services many different African populations and just
assists with navigating as new Americans, teaching them how to just navigate the system and understand the different culture.
James Early: Among the older Kenyan citizens, residents here in the United States, you identify as African American.
Is there another dominant category or predominant category in how other Kenyans, of Kenyan background might identify themselves?
Gathoni Kamau: Well, I do, I do identify myself as Kenyan but because I've lived here so long I say, OK, I'm a Kenyan American, and I'm from Africa so I'm an African American.
That is how I interpret it and because I'm like, that's what I am, and so um, sorry, what was the question?
James Early: No, that's good.
Gathoni Kamau: OK, alright.
James Early: Yes sir.
Eduardo: Thank you very much, very interesting topics, and the different type of presentations of the same topic from different viewpoints.
Uh, my name is Eduardo, and uh I am actually from Central America, Honduras.
And as far as the Black diaspora, I am also a Garifuna, part of the Garifuna people out of Honduras.
And one interesting take is that when I came to this country, not being able to speak one word of English,
the people whom actually invariably embraced me were African Americans as opposed to the non-African descendant or the non-Afro Latinos.
So ironically enough I I would like to ask the question, sort of, how-
yeah, when you came here as an adult, whom were you embraced by, and and, as, you even though you came in as a child,
how were you embraced by, let's just say the Chinese community, by the African American community, by others?
Gathoni Kamau: So when I came I was a student, so I was in university, and at the time where I was there was a very strong African students association
and so I joined the association because that's what I identified with. And so within that, for me,
it was great because I had never- I had met some different Africans from different African countries but never so many in one place.
And so that exp- so that was where the primary embracing was because it was--I s--it's not as--that, you know, it's a college town, and so within the college culture
the African Students Association was the cultural group that we, you know, we cooked together, and that's--what--"Oh you guys cooked this!" You know, you inter--you find out,
"Oh I know that word!" because of the Bantu languages have some root words in common. And so, for me that experience was learning about
the differences and the similarities because, you know, for Africa it has been in the past, just like 'one' but it's so so so diverse;
even within each nation. So just learning those differences was wonderful. And that's where--that's where I was embraced first.
James Early: Mr. Wong?
Raymond Wong: I can only speak like when I first got here I was like, almost two, so I don't remember that much, but if I just progress a little farther, when I was five or six, um
Raymond Wong: In my father's uh, Chinese restaurant. The customers uh, I don't remember seeing any white people. There were none.
There were no other Chinese people, so it was all black. And uh, we had a juke box there uh, I remember some of the songs.
Okay uh, Fast domino and different things like that. Y'know, yeah it was like uh, five cents y'know,
yeh, and I used to sing there too. Y'know I used to, right there next to the juke box.
Okay, and uh. The only white person I saw, was the milk man. Embassy dairy. He delivered the milk to the restaurant, and it came in bottles back then
and occasionally I would see a cop. A white cop um, and for about a year uh, the other white person I saw was um,
I forgot his name now, but he would pick me, and take me to this farm in uh, Culpeper. Because my parents had to work they couldn't really take care of me, at that age.
They couldn't watch me, so they had, so they sent me there, to live with this farmer in Culpeper, so he would take me there.
He had other kids there too. So I guess they were the same situation. So uh, th- he took care of me.
He took me away Monday through Saturday, then Sunday he would bring me back. Spend a day.
So this went of for a couple of years, so m- cause my mother and father had to really work.
They, they, they work like fourteen hours a day in our restaurant. And
when I got old enough, six or seven, I got my chores in the restaurant. I had to do certain things, I was stock, stock boy,
and um, back then the only white people I saw were the cops, and watching t.v. It was chocolate city at that time,
it was really chocolate city. So, uh- and um it was tough getting along I mean, well getting by, because there weren't that many other Chinese there. It was only a few.
The hand laundry, our restaurant, and the Chinese in Chinatown. There weren't that many Chinese restaurants, throughout the neighborhood like there is now.
So uh, if a Chinese person walk on the street that's an odd thing. That was really an odd thing, and I uh, got called all kind of names.
uh, Based on y'know uh, what the latest name is at that moment. Is a lot of different names they call you, but uh
it was a lot of slang, thrown at me. So I went to public school uh, down the street from where the restaurant was, and um
I mean according to my parents I had a rough time there, but I felt like it was okay. I didn't know the difference, but anyway,
but uh, that's pretty much my everyday uh environment, during the sixties
James Early: So in terms of growing up, hearing Fats Domino, do you sort of feel like Fats Domino's music is your music? It's not just 'those people's music'?
Raymond Wong: Well you gotta remember, from the sixties all the way, the jukebox was there from the sixties to the seventies,
and then we got rid of it after the Martin Luther King riots,
because, uh like, I remember, like, ten people would come in with five cents to play one song so all ten people can stand there and listen to it,
and they weren't buying anything else! and my father was like, 'Oh you're--[[laughter]]
you can't do that here!' [[laughter]] Yeah. Ten people would get five cents to come listen to one song. And they would dance and, you know,
and all the other customers were like, 'What's going on here? I want us some food!'
So that's what happened then. So- uh, there was a lot of artists from the early sixties to the end of the seventies, yeah.
James Early: Have you visited China as an adult?
Raymond Wong: Yeah, I went back in 1985 and uh, but it's different now.
James Early: Talk a little about that.
Raymond Wong: Well, you know, I went back there in 1985, it was, it was still kinda hard to get in. I mean, it was not as free as it is now.
Um, it was a very- how do you call it? I'm not going to say primitive, but it was a very, I guess, country-like, most of China.
But it's it's totally different now. This was just, this was just before the changed everything and built high-rises.
So when I went back there it was um- I remember the lack of toilets.
[[laughter]]
Yeah. Everybody went on the side of the road. Yeah, that's where they went. Uh, and everybody was a vendor.
Everybody was a vendor and at that time the Chinese who were from China, they went back as tourists.
There weren't that many Americans there at that time. But now I'm sure it's different.
James Early: Miss Kamau how often do you visit Kenya?
Gathoni Kamau: Not too often but I was last there two thousand--oh! Last year in January. I was there last year in January.
James Early: Did it have any particular sensory impact on you about being Kenyan-slash-black American here, versus who Kenyans are today?
Gathoni Kamau: No, no. Once I'm home, I'm just home, you know? It's almost like when you're, you're just in a different um, time zone, you're in a different culture, you just, after the jet lag you just, you now, um,
find that, you know, family members, catch up with family members and just-
James Early: Who are your family members? Aunts, uncles, or just cousins?
Gathoni Kamau: Yeah siblings. Aunts, uncles,
James Early: And siblings?
Gathoni Kamau: yes. Friends, it's very close.
James Early: You have siblings in other places on the continent of Africa and/or Europe or other areas of the world?
Gathoni Kamau: No. Well, I have other siblings here and in Kenya.
James Early: The reason I ask that question is, you know, one of the things that we are seeing in this new diaspora
Americans for many many years, and some of you will be quite familiar with this
or right here on Capital Hill, many congresspeople have in the last 20 years said 'I am proud not to have a passport.'
When I was a 19 year old sophomore in the Panama Canal zone in Central America with 8 military US bases there,
I would be hanging out with the G.I.'s, I was their age but I was not a G.I., I was a student.
And they would often say to me, 'Hey school boy! I won't see you for a couple weeks. I am going back to the world next week and I'll be back in 3 weeks.'
That was a constant refrain. 'I am going back to the world.' Which meant that I'm nowhere.
The United States was the world and my children at 38 and 35, my oldest lives in east London, has lived there for about 14 years.
I think we are seeing more US children now, move around the world in the way we have seen the rest of the world, particularly in the south move a lot.
Gathoni Kamau: So, I mean, I have a lot of friends and relatives who live in different African countries or in Europe or anywhere in the world
because of work, marriage, you know, just because. Sometimes people just want to have a different experience.
So, that, you're right is much more common now than it ever was, you know, before. So, that definitely is-
James Early: And from the things that we are seeing out here: the songs, the dance, the crafts, the culinary traditions,
the skills, the knowledge base. That moves and it tends not to be just identified with a flag or with a national anthem or with a border.
We are seeing in the southwest part of the United States, people who go home and come home in the millions,
hardworking people who are everyday neighbors. And our laws are out of synced with our lived realities.
So, before 9/11, this diaspora, something called Cedula Matricula, an identification card, there was an accident.
People wanted to know about about 'How can I do a blood transfusion?' not whether I am looking at an alien or an illegal or an undocumented.
So, we are seeing this push-pull and diaspora really is feeding that in new kinds of ways.
Other observations or questions from you. You may have different views about this topic.
What diaspora are you from? Where is you family background? Does it extend outside of the United States?
In the case of the Garifuna, a diaspora not only with regard to Africa but starting in St. Vincent in the Grenadines
in Barbados and you can find it in Honduras and, I think, in Guatemala.
Nicaragua. And New York City is perhaps the largest of the Garifuna community.
So, what is it to be a US citizen or an American or what is it to be a Garifuna?
We are now learning- or what is it to be Chinese or Kenyan or black American?
The new lived realities in terms of our cultural ways of knowing and doing a many many things.
Uh, how are we on- Oh, we gotta- So, come on folk
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask Mr. Wong, uh, your experience growing up in Chocolate City,
how how has that affected at all, your working with martial arts and how did you get into martial arts? Why martial arts from cooking to martial arts?
Raymond Wong: Uh well [[chuckles]] uh--
Speaker 3: [[heckler]] Tell it like it is!
Raymond Wong: Yeah yeah. Well I got into martial arts because uh, because I was having some rough times at school in Chocolate City.
And uh, of course I was watching TV and I see these guys kicking people and uh,
taking them out in like, two or three moves; I said, 'Maybe I need to take some of that!'
So I just went to Chinatown of course--where else would I go, right?
Went to Chinatown, they had a school just opening up at that time -- this was back in the, uh, early seventies.
And right around that time that TV series came on, with David Carradine, called Kung Fu?
That just--and back then, June Ree was popular. Remember TV Guide?
Your TV Guide. He always had an advertisement in there, what, it was $12.95 or $19.95? You get a bag, and a uniform and a week's introductory lesson.
So I looked at that, I looked at all this, said "OK, maybe I need to do this", you know?
So I went down to take a lesson and, uh, I just found it interesting. I just kept on and here I am today, I have a school.
James Early: I hope this doesn't put Ms. Kamau on the spot. Um, so you are at the National Museum of African Art in the capital of the United States of America.
So how many other African-borned folk are working there?
Gathoni Kamau: Just myself.
James Early: I raised that question because one of the principles of this festival and the Center for Folk life and Cultural Heritage is issues of cultural democracy.
Um, speaking of these intersections of diasporas and identities, when I came to the Smithsonian Institution
there were hardly any African Americans in professional positions, now there are tons of them.
We were not even talking about--well the term Asian Pacific American had just emerged.
And we were not talking about new African citizens immigrants and a major part of what we are interested in is how our country-- and we had this discussion yesterday with old curators,
how this festival it's a sort of mirror for America when it was called the Festival of American Folklife,
before it went to begin to deal with international communities, and now we're beyond the notion.
We still incorporate the notion of international communities but the question of diaspora communities
and I think it's a very important question for us in the United States and for us at the Smithsonian Institution, whose mandate is the increasing diffusion of knowledge.
Not simply how are we reflecting the world, with whom we are reflecting the world?
Because while you and I look alike and there are the obvious gender differences, people might assume that we still have the same psychological make-up
and because-- we come from different backgrounds or the Garifona, we may look alike, or
There are other Asian Pacific Americans out here who may--I see people nodding their heads,
but say, well you look like Mr. Wong but you may be Indonesian American, or Filipino American
and these are questions that I think this kind of program on the diaspora can help us in a very positive, affirming way
ask ourselves 'Who are all of us? and what-' as Mr. Wong was saying '-what kind of context are we building to look at how we treat one another'
just not make the assumptions of how we look at one another. Uh
James Early: Yes sir and then I will come to, you know what let me do a gender--I have been speaking of democracy and then I will come to you.
Judy Kipngeny: I have an observation. OK. Hi my name is Judy Kipngeny and I am a filmmaker and a Kenyan who lives in Kenya but is here for this week
and I think it's more of an observation because when I was very little I grew up in Washington D.C.
and returning home about the age of eight my fear was, you know, oh my God the animals are going to get me!
All the American fears that perhaps a little girl who would be American would feel.
And as someone who has sort of seen Kenya change very much,
the 90's a time of a lot of fear, a great dictatorship, and people who got onto planes didn't really come back or didn't want to come back or people were surprised when you came back.
And, I just wanted to observe that today I think, you know, thanks to perhaps the internet, thanks to a great understanding to what the world is there is a greater fluidity,
people flow this way and then they come back. People who have been here for twenty, thirty years
seem to flow back into home in a more seamless kind of way and I just feel the world is kind of in a--even though there is so much negativity attached to globalization--there's there's a beautiful thing about how
we're fearing less to see people move over to this side because they can come back and we are fearing less to be in Africa in our part of the world because we can come this way, sometimes.
James Early: So you lived in Washington D.C.? So do you still feel a kind of identity? It's gone?
Judy Kipngeny: I think the identity is more, I think it's a human identity because I think you know sometimes all this kind of curiosity and confusion about what America is,
what Gathoni is doing out there in Washington, all of that has somehow you know with the fact that you don't mail a letter and get one back three months later.
You know? Everyone can, can e-mail on their phone or, or look up America. So, so it's not so much about feeling an identity or not with America,
it's more realizing that the differences are somehow, even though exaggerated by issues of poverty and so on, the similarities have just grown so much.
James Early: I will come to this gentleman and then I'll come back to you and come to you and I think that will, you will be our last and we will go back and have Ms. Kamau and Mr. Wong  make closing comments.
Speaker 2: Thanks for sharing your life experiences and I was actually thinking along the same lines as notion of fluidity
and I wondered if you would engage in a highly speculative thought experiment for me based on your own experiences and those of your extended family members?
If there were no laws, there were no border fences, there were no border infestment, uh, enforcement, what do you think the world would look like?
[[Silence]]
James Early: If there were no restrictions of movement, no borders, no national, nationalities that made a difference, what do you think the world would look like?
Gathoni Kamau: That was a great question. [[laughs]] I am thinking as I speak but um, I think that the way we are as human people, we would find other issues to um
you know I think focus on, or, or make an issue of and other things would be the focus, but I really believe that
in the way you phrase the question would money be no issue either so people could just go wherever they wanted and do whatever they wanted because
you know the green, always the grass always seems gra-greener on the other side and so if I had the money I would go everywhere to see the other side.
You know what I mean? Just to see it so I think just as a human being though and just meeting
so many people from so many different parts of the world, because I have been able to be fluid and move around
although even in Nairobi I meet people from all over the world, it gives you that human curiosity of "Ah" I,
because you've made the connect and it's not disassociated from a screen or a picture, you like, oh, they just like me, you know they get angry or they get sad or they like this fruit and they don't like this.
So, so the humanness of us becomes, it's like the, it's just, it is we are just human-beings and that takes more precedence
and so you are drawn to a person because you met them and now you want to go to where they live and know more about them
and increase that knowledge and just fill that curiosity and then make the conclusion and you're like "oh, I want to meet more people like this or I don't want to meet more people like this."
it boils down sometimes to personalities and not to, you know one mean someone American doesn't mean there's a thousand beautiful, wonderful Americans, so it causes I think
it would be great if we could just travel and come back and I don't know what we would-I what would dictate our identity
you know? So, that's a great question, I don't know if it would be your language. I don't know.
James Early: Mr. Wong if we were able to just move about freely what do you think?
Raymond Wong: That's a tough question, in what span of time? One year, five years, ten years, fifty years?
Uh, it's hard to say but looking at humans: when you try to contain them, they try to get out.
When you tell them to go out they come back. So, if you say you can go anywhere and be anything you want, they want they will try to dig their roots even harder
and try to figure out what am I really because everybody else is all mixed up. So, I think they will do the opposite. Maybe.
James Early: Okay, good. I am going to take two last questions at the same time and as I walk to this gentleman with the mike the last time I looked at stats
and this has a lot to do with diasporan culture all over the world, except on the continent of Africa, people are moving from the south to the north
because of the great economic engine having to do with colonialism and all kinds of things are in the north except on the continent of Africa
the great economic engine has been South Africa until recently Nigeria has become the largest economy.
So, culture tends to flow where it can be fed, where it can be housed, where it can be clothed, where it can get healthcare, where it has family members and familiarity.
So, as you think about diasporas and culture, there are these other factors.
Speaker 1: I thought I would share with Mr. Wong. It's not a question but I grew up during World War II a couple of blocks from here on Independence Avenue and
the block was half black and half white and those were very interesting times. Because we had race battles, uh, between the half of the block that was black and half of the block that was white.
And I was scared as hell of all black people. And I ran from them, and I knew- I could go up the steps on my roller skates because if I didn't get up the steps I thought I would be killed.
But I think I've matured, Uh, I now have black employees and, uh, a Japanese wife.
So I'm familiar with a lot of different aspects of the Diaspora and I think things are a whole lot better now than they used to be when I was a kid.
[[Silence]]
James Early: Thank you for, uh, for the honesty and, uh, I think it points up a very important thing about Diaspora and Mr. Wong emphasizes at the outset.
Raymond Wong: He was outnumbered. (Laughing)
James Early: Ha,ha he was out-numbered.
Raymond Wong: So he was Scared.
James Early: And he also pointed that at the outset. But when we get to know one another
based on how we act as individuals in the context of the group from which we come,
we find out the diversity of that group, that culture, the complexity of it and we find our se- ways to one another uh,
and I think we have a great example here of how history- once we were are segregated, but once we begin involved,
we have real opportunities to build community not just Diasporism amongst those from where we come.
Uh, but to build this larger community that Mr. Wong answered. You have the last observation or question.
[[Background Noise]]
Jennifer: Hi, I'm Jennifer, I live in the neighborhood, um, and I say this as a second-generation Hong Kong descendent.
Um, my- you know my parents and grandparents ran restaurants in the sixties and went through the race riots in Philadelphia. Not in D.C. but along the east coast.
And I think it's clear that Diasporic narratives clearly evolve over time and over generations.
And it was the hope of my grandparents that I would not have to work the long hours in a restaurant that they did
and face the struggles that they did an- and rather enjoy the benefits of education and being a part of an educated professional class of Asian-Americans which has evolved over time.
And I'm proud that-that many of us are able to-to achieve that. And with respect to the Smithsonian's mission of-of disseminating knowledge,
I think it'd be so great to see some of those contributions reflected in festivals such as this, um beyond-
I think Five Spice Kitchen is a great and catchy title but how about, you know, 5 million contributions of Asians of the Diaspora in Science and Technology.
Politics and Law. Uh, Literature and Arts. I think that would be amazing.
So, you know, I think we might have a little bit more to go in terms of what does the Diaspora look like over time and not just, uh perhaps in the immediate first-generation sense
but second, third, and fourth as we see the legacy, uh , emerge. Um, I think that would be phenomenal. Thank you so much.
James Early: Thank you and any final comments, Miss Kamau and Mr. Wong?
Gathoni Kamau: No, I just, um thank you very much for having us, uh having me part-be part of this discussion
James Early: Mr. Wong?
Raymond Wong: Thank you, thank you everyone.
James Early: If you can't travel to your Diaspora, you know it's on the internet, that is a new dis-dimension that we will have to look at. Thank you very much.
[[clapping]]
Yes, so thank you James Early. Don't go away and, actually the last comment about restaurants leads directly to our next discussion section here on the Tea House Commons.
It's called 'Sweet and Sour: Chinese Food in America.' Featuring two panelists, so don't go away too far starting in just a few minutes here on day number 5 at the 2014 Smithsonian Folklife Festival.